LDRS 664 Unit 9: Confidence and Humility
========================================

Overview
--------

In this unit, you will explore the role of trust, confidence and intellectual
humility in the practice and dispositions of the adult educator who is trying to
establish an authentic learning community. You will consider your values as an
individual as well as an educator and help you to define your role and purpose
as an adult educator.

Topics 
-------

1.  Learning to trust ourselves in difficult situations

2.  Approaches to making a contribution in an intellectually humble way.

Learning Outcomes:
------------------

When you have completed this unit you should be able to:

-   Explain why self-knowledge is an important part of being an effective adult
    educator and leads to increased self-confidence and humility.

-   Describe the contribution you want to make as an adult educator.

-   Define intellectual humility in your own words.

-   Describe strategies to foster intellectual humility in yourself and in your
    learning environment.

Activity Checklist
------------------

Here is a checklist of learning activities you will benefit from in completing
this unit. You may find it useful for planning your work.

1.  Read assigned pages from Wheatley chapter 8 and Coda. Consider the
    reflection question.

2.  Write a blog about the Merton quote.

3.  Watch TedX talk by Sam Horn and practice the technique.

4.  Read Leary et al. article and engage in self-evaluation.

5.  Jot down practices related to intellectual humility.

6.  Watch two videoclips of Andrew pinsent and jot down some notes in your own
    words.

    **[Christine, please put in chart format]**

Topic 1: Learning to trust ourselves in difficult situations
------------------------------------------------------------

**Introduction**

We see the world through our own lens - which is why knowing ourselves is so
very important. What parts of your past trigger reactions in you? Where do you
find you are at your best? What is important to you? What bothers you? If you
can articulate these things clearly then you will have more confidence and trust
yourself in difficult situations. Why is this the case? Because when we honestly
know ourselves and we join a sense of humble awareness with a sincere desire to
work with others to make a positive impact, we have more confidence,
self-efficacy and an increased willingness to engage – even in difficult
situations. In the Bible we read that God is working through all things for our
good (Romans 8:28). If we *really* believe this, consider how this belief might
influence your thinking, allowing you tol find peace and a humble confidence
even in difficult situations.

How does one get to know oneself? Times of solitude spent reading, creating,
walking in nature, relationships with others, new experiences, travel are all
activities that allow us to get to know ourselves, depending on our frame of
mind. If we read material that helps us ask some of the questions mentioned
above through exploring the life of another person (fictional or real) or if we
take part in experiences that help us discover what we are good or what matters
to us, these will lead to increased self-knowledge. Flannery O’Connor
illustrates the power of narrative saying: “There is something in us, as
storytellers and as listeners to stories, that demands the redemptive act, that
demands that what falls at least be offered the change to be restored.” (Arntz,
V. 2018) Why does this matter for the adult educator? It matters because
education is about transformation of people – not just their intellectual growth
but themselves. Transformation requires knowing oneself first.

While Wheatley somewhat discounts the role of hope (278-280), Christian leaders
and teachers are indeed people of hope and optimism who nonetheless realize the
importance of Havel’s definition that “Hope is not the conviction that something
will turn out well, but the certainty that something is worth doing no matter
how it turns out” (Wheatley, 280). In other words, we need to welcome the
reality of whatever learners are bringing to the learning environment and look
for the possibilities hidden in it - the possibilities for redemption and
restoration. For example, some learners may have painful memories of school, a
sense of inadequacy or else an inflated view of themselves. Some learners may
have experienced severe trauma that affects their ability to process
information. Some learners may have trouble reading or writing to the level we
would hope they could achieve as graduate students. Whoever our learners are and
whatever abilities or disabilities they bring, we need to create the conditions
so they can become better human beings and more knowledgeable and skillful
because of having spent time with us as their learning guides.

Our [hope and vision must be rooted in the
present](https://sites.google.com/site/savingsoulsforgod/home/websites/l-arche/daily-thoughts-from-jean-vanier)
(See Daily Thoughts from Jean

Vanier). If that present is fraught with difficulties and challenges, the
self-aware teacher leader embraces that reality and moves forward trusting
themselves and, for the Christian, trusting God is working all things for our
good. This requires courage – as Wheatley notes it is rooted in ‘coeur’ or heart
(279). Courage with heart is needed to face the challenges of handling
challenging situations when we ourselves might not feel equipped. Courage with
heart tempered by intellectual humility is needed to transform lives through
education. Effective adult educators are people with a vision for good, with
confidence that they can influence positive change and help facilitate
transformation in their learners because they are continually working on their
own self-knowledge and will research the strategies and methods as well as the
content that will be most helpful for their learners to be successful.

### Learning Activity 9.1: Read and Reflect

Read Wheatley, M. (2017). *Who Do We Choose to Be?: Facing Reality, Claiming
Leadership, Restoring Sanity.* Oakland, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers. Chapter
8 (pages 273-288 ) and Coda (pages 292-294)

As you read this chapter and Coda, think about your own self perceptions and
what you believe is worth doing as an adult educator.

### Learning Activity 9.2: Blog

After having read the introductory notes, Wheatley chapter 8 and Coda:

Write 300 words in response to the following quote by Thomas Merton, quoted in
Wheatley p. 294:

>   “Humans have a responsibility to find themselves where they are, in their
>   own proper time and place, in the history to which they belong and to which
>   they must inevitably contribute either their response or their evasions,
>   either truth and act, or mere slogan and gesture.”

**Post your responses to your blog and be sure to respond to 1-2 of your peers’
posts.**

### Learning Activity 9.3: Did You Know?

We will learn to trust ourselves more and build our confidence if we are able to
convince even ourselves of our own self-efficacy! Watch this
[video](https://youtu.be/Xlg8zdSVjgg) (2014) ‘How to create interest and connect
with anyone’ by Sam Horn. The process described in this TedXtalk teaches the
power of three ‘did you know’ questions followed by three attributes or
solutions as a way to connect with others and help them understand what’s
important to you and how you can help them.

Practice this by asking yourself:

-   What is a project I care deeply about?

-   What are three questions or three statistics I can use to help explain the
    significance of this project?

Follow Sam Horn’s suggested process to create your own intriguing pitch and try
it out with others until it sounds natural and comes easily to you.

<br>Topic 2: Approaches and examples of how to make a contribution as an adult educator while being intellectually humble. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Introduction**

The Foundation for Critical Thinking defines [intellectual
humility](http://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/valuable-intellectual-traits/528):

>   Having a consciousness of the limits of one's knowledge, including a
>   sensitivity to circumstances in which one's native egocentrism is likely to
>   function self-deceptively; sensitivity to bias, prejudice and limitations of
>   one's viewpoint. Intellectual humility depends on recognizing that one
>   should not claim more than one actually knows. It does not imply
>   spinelessness or submissiveness. It implies the lack of intellectual
>   pretentiousness, boastfulness, or conceit, combined with insight into the
>   logical foundations, or lack of such foundations, of one's beliefs. 

As a Christian adult educator, aim to be a servant leader-teacher. As servant
leader *teacher*, seek to engage people’s heads, hearts and hopes and empower
learners to turn their newfound knowledge and skills into action. Infuse your
role with a perspective of the common good and engage confidently in
contemporary cultural tensions. With students who are Christian this perspective
of the common good finds its roots and

expression in a relationship with Jesus Christ. For students who are not of the
Christian faith, strive to espouse this in word and example in a way that is
respectful of their heritage and traditions while at the same time giving them
an understanding of the Christian worldview. Take the time to listen for what is
important to them and to understand their beliefs in order to build bridges of
understanding through respect.

Realizing that our core values, personality traits and characteristics impact to
how we learn and teach, take the time to discern your essential values. For
example, I have identified the following six essential values to incorporate
into my life and teaching: honesty, integrity, persistence, desire to learn,
compassion/empathy and community. Because I value compassion/empathy and
community, I put the learner first and design my curricula and methodologies to
suit the learners in my class. Because I value persistence and the desire to
learn, I don’t give up on students and I try to find ways to help them learn
through different methods and alternate ways that they can demonstrate their
learning.

These values direct my entire teaching methodology; I espouse the goals of
differentiated instruction (basically changing instructional methods to adapt to
different learners) and aim to create a space for learning that empowers all
students to succeed. (See
[here](https://study.com/academy/lesson/what-is-differentiated-instruction-examples-definition-activities.html)
for more information). Differentiated instruction is a seamless part of my
instructional planning and practice and I intentionally create opportunities to
learn about students’ strengths, needs, interests, preferences and ways of
learning.
[Here](http://www.educationplanner.org/students/self-assessments/learning-styles-quiz.shtml)
is an example of a self-assessment tool to help identify a learner’s learning
style. To this end I use meaningful [engaging
tasks](https://www.prolaera.com/7-effective-way-to-engage-adult-learners/),
[flexible
grouping](https://www.kpu.ca/sites/default/files/Teaching%20and%20Learning/TD.1.3_Bedford%26Wiebe%26Tschida_Flexible_Grouping.pdf),
and ongoing [assessment and
adjustment](https://lincs.ed.gov/state-resources/federal-initiatives/teal/guide/formativeassessment).
I differentiate the content, process, or product components of the educational
experience by using a range of strategies and methods, e.g., anchor activities,
tiered lessons, small-group instruction, and varied tasks.

I’ve used my own practice as a Christian educator as an example to give you some
ideas and direction. Please take the time to explore the resources linked in the
notes and other resources in your Brookfield and Silberman texts. The approach
taken throughout this course is an intellectually humble one. In chapters five
and six Brookfield (2013) particularly addresses the power dynamic in the
classroom, awareness of which may foster a more intellectually humble approach.
You are encouraged to use your texts as primary resources for more detailed
information about specific strategies and approaches to making a contribution as
an adult educator while remaining intellectually humble.

### Learning Activity 9.4: Reading

Read this article: Leary, Mark & J. Diebels, Kate & K. Davisson, Erin & P.
Jongman-Sereno, Katrina & Isherwood, Jennifer & Raimi, Kaitlin & Deffler,
Samantha & Hoyle, Rick. (2017). Cognitive and Interpersonal Features of
Intellectual Humility. *Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 43*.
014616721769769. 10.1177/0146167217697695.

This is the permalink to this article in the TWU library:

<https://ezproxy.student.twu.ca/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=edsgao&AN=edsgcl.501348880&site=eds-live&custid=s6511865&groupid=main&profile=eds>

As you read this article, self-evaluate your level of openness, curiosity,
tolerance of ambiguity and dogmaticism.

### Learning Activity 9.5: Reflection

What two or three actions can you incorporate into your practice as an adult
educator and leader to nurture your own intellectual humility and foster it in
your students?

### Learning Activity 9.6: Videos

Watch this [video](https://youtu.be/ny5m64sjm14) (2016) where Andrew Pinsent,
Research Director at Oxford University answers the question: ’Why is
intellectual humility important for the flourishing of persons?' Then watch this
[video](https://youtu.be/j25KL5qw_tY) (2016) where he answers the question:
‘What is still interesting about Aquinas’ concept of humility?’

As you view the short video clips jot down some notes in your own words or any
questions that you want to explore further about the topic of intellectual
humility.

Unit Summary
------------

In this unit, you have had the opportunity to learn about the role of trust,
confidence and intellectual humility in the practice and dispositions of the
adult educator. You have considered your values as an individual as well as an
educator and further defined your role and purpose as an adult educator. As you
move on to the last unit of this course, consider your values and how you view
your role as an adult educator. The culminating assignment is a platform of
beliefs where this will be important.

Checking your Learning
----------------------

Use the learning outcomes for this unit as a checklist of understanding before
you move to the next unit.

-   Can you explain why self-knowledge is an important part of being an
    effective adult educator and leads to increased self-confidence and
    humility?

-   Can you describe the contribution you want to make as an adult educator?

-   Can you define intellectual humility in your own words?

-   Can you describe strategies to foster intellectual humility in yourself and
    in your learning environment?

Resources
---------

Arntz, V. 2018. Flannery O’Connor & Redemption Amidst the Grotesque. Available
at <https://catholicexchange.com/flannery-oconnor-redemption-amidst-grotesque>.

Brookfield, S. (2013). *Powerful Techniques for Teaching Adults*. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Brookfield, S. and Preskill, S. (2016). *The Discussion Book: 50 Great Ways to
Get People Talking*. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.  

Leary, Mark & J. Diebels, Kate & K. Davisson, Erin & P. Jongman-Sereno, Katrina
& Isherwood, Jennifer & Raimi, Kaitlin & Deffler, Samantha & Hoyle, Rick.
(2017). Cognitive and Interpersonal Features of Intellectual Humility.
*Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 43*. 014616721769769.
10.1177/0146167217697695.

This is the permalink to this article in the TWU library:

<https://ezproxy.student.twu.ca/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=edsgao&AN=edsgcl.501348880&site=eds-live&custid=s6511865&groupid=main&profile=eds>

Silberman, M. L., & Biech, E. (2015). *Active training: A handbook of
techniques, designs, case examples, and tips* (4th ed.). Wiley.

Wheatley, M. (2017). *Who do we choose to be? Facing reality, claiming
leadership, restoring sanity.*
