Unit 8: Teaching from Depth, Interconnectedness and Integrity
=============================================================

Overview
--------

In this unit you will consider how to teach with depth. This is grounded in who
you are – recall the first units of the course. Teaching with depth in the
workplace or in an academic setting is founded on relationships and values. In
this unit you will apply your reflections to an analysis of a company’s adult
learning initiatives.

Topics 
-------

1.  Adult education methods to teach from depth

2.  Web of relationships and impact on values

Learning Outcomes:
------------------

When you have completed this unit, you should be able to:

-   Analyze the effectiveness of training and employee development.

-   Explain how to teach and lead for depth using discussion strategies and
    questions

-   Evaluate adult education methods considering impact on organizational
    culture.

-   Articulate your personal web of relationship and impact on values.

Activity Checklist
------------------

Here is a checklist of learning activities you will benefit from in completing
this unit. You may find it useful for planning your work.

1.  View the Six Adult Learning Principles video.

2.  Jot down the six principles in your reflection journal.

3.  Read the Fenwick article.

4.  Jot down the eight categories of workplace learning in your journal.

5.  Complete website analysis assignment.

6.  Read Wheatley chapter 6 and take notes in your reflection journal.

7.  Write and post your blog.

    **[Christine, please put in chart format]**

Topic 1: Adult education methods to teach from depth.
-----------------------------------------------------

**Introduction**

What does it mean to teach from depth? It connects to the principle of adult
learning that adults are internally motivated and build on prior life experience
when they learn. Motivation is tapped into and amplified through reflective
techniques and critical discussions that help the adult make sense of the new
learning and situate it into what they already know. Asking thoughtful questions
can lead this inquiry so that the learner constructs their own meaning. The
facilitator of adult learning recognizes what Fenwick (2010) refers to as ‘the
mess’ of learning and therefore strategically employs different levels of
learning, making connections and establishing networks of information, while
being aware of context and power dynamics.

Teaching from depth means nurturing and valuing self-awareness, committing to
self-reflection and mindfulness and practicing teaching from depth. This last
point is important in order to balance reflection and introspection with action.
Herminia Ibarra (2015) refers to this as ‘outsight’ (in contrast to insight) and
argues that direct experiences and experimentation are important in order to
develop external perspective. In the context of facilitating adult education
this means trying out various strategies and learning through trial, error,
refinement and adjustment. Where internal knowledge, past experience and
thinking contribute to insight, external knowledge, new experience and acting
contribute to outsight (p. 6). Teaching from depth involves developing insight
and outsight – through utilizing both reflective practices and strategies and
experiential learning.

One strategy that can be used to teach for depth is called Stanislavski’s *Magic
If* (Schuyler, p. 204). Stanislavski introduced method acting in the early
twentieth century. This method, often referred to as role play, is where actors
draw from their own life experiences to produce truthful actions and emotions.
In the context of adult education, the learner imagines the circumstances of a
particular learning experience and tries to figure out what to do in that
situation. This technique is often applied in the classroom when case studies
are utilized so that the learner’s life experiences are bridged via the
imaginary situation, challenging the learner to construct and integrate new
meaning while being solutions-focused. Among the many examples in Brookfield’s
*Discussion Book* some of the strategies that foster teaching for depth include:
Snowballing p. 49, Critical Incident Questionnaire (CIQ) p. 59, Nominating
Questions p. 77 and Writing Discussion p. 157. I encourage you to review these
particular strategies and add to your proverbial ‘toolkit’.

### Activity 8.1: Video

View: Cason Smith, [The Six Adult Learning
Principles](https://youtu.be/vLJ7cRwKI-I)

As you view this video jot down the principles in your reflection journal for
future reference when you complete the company website analysis assignment.
Reflect one or two of these principles and consider how you might apply them to
practice, and also how they relate to your “Philosophy of Learning Communities”
you developed in Unit 5.

### Activity 8.2: Reading

Read Fenwick, T. (2010). [Workplace ‘Learning’ and Adult Education: Messy
Objects, blurry maps and making difference. European Journal for Research on the
Education and Learning of
Adults.](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/dd22/0d93e5e07aea232ec87a1ae237bf7ea4b76a.pdf)
*I,* 79-95.

As you read this article, focus on the eight categories of workplace learning
beginning on page 81 and only read the rest of the article if you are
interested. Consider how these categories connect with the adult learning
principles you looked at in your website analysis assignment.

### Activity 8.3: Role Play

Practice using role play by planning a teaching and learning activity that
utilizes role play. Consider a discipline of interest to you or a concept of
leadership that you want students to engage with further. Sketch out the
directions to your future class for a role play activity. Alternatively, you may
want to practice role play with a colleague, family member, or friend. Select a
topic, such as belonging or community, and develop a role play to teach that
concept within an online or face-to-face learning environment.

### Activity 8.4: Company Website Analysis Assignment (20%)

Investigate the Human Resources portion of a company's website, a higher
education institution or adult learning facility - preferably one with which you
are familiar. Focus on the training and employee development part of the
website. This assignment is meant to apply the theory of teaching in/for/with
depth by looking at the learning culture of an organization.

Here are some examples to get you started:

-   McDonald’s:
    <https://www.mcdonalds.com/ca/en-ca/careers/training-and-benefits.html>

-   TD Bank: <https://jobs.td.com/en-CA/why-choose-us/training-development/>

-   Starbucks:
    <http://www.starbucks.com.hk/about-us/become-a-partner/learning-and-development>

Answer the following questions in your report:

1.  What can you infer about the company’s learning culture?

2.  From what is visible on the public website, would you say it is an authentic
    learning community? Why or why not? Discuss whether the website reflects
    aspects of one or more of the learning community models explored in previous
    lessons.

3.  Do you see evidence that interconnectedness and integrity are valued?
     Explain.

4.  What traits and skills seem to be valued in employees?

5.  How does the company develop skills in its employees (e.g., workshops,
    seminars, mentoring)? Are the methods based on the principles of andragogy?
    (see Smith YouTube video). What specific adult learning strategies do you
    see reflected in the development/training opportunities for employees?

Write a 300-500 (total) word response to the above questions keeping the rubric
below in mind.

### Company Website Analysis Rubric 

| **Criteria**               | **Fully Meeting Expectations 5**                                                                                                 | **Developing 3-4**                                                      | **No attempt or not representative of Graduate level work. 0-2**                                |
|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Company's Learning Culture | Discussion of authentic learning culture is sufficiently detailed, synthesizing analysis of the website with scholarly readings. | Discussion of authentic learning culture is incomplete                  | Incomplete discussion of company's learning culture. Limited integration of scholarly readings. |
| Leadership Traits          | Discussion of perceived value of leadership traits is sufficiently detailed.                                                     | Discussion of perceived value of leadership traits is incomplete.       | No discussion of perceived value of leadership traits.                                          |
| People Development         | Discussion of people development is sufficiently detailed, including examples.                                                   | Discussion of people development is incomplete and/or lacking examples. | No discussion of people development.                                                            |
| Mechanics                  | No errors in grammar or composition. APA citation is used correctly.                                                             | Two or fewer errors in grammar, composition, or APA citation.           | Three or more errors in grammar, composition, or APA citation.                                  |
|                            |                                                                                                                                  |                                                                         |                                                                                                 |

<br>Topic 2: Web of relationships and impact on values.
-------------------------------------------------------

**Introduction**

We are who we are partly because of who we associate with. Perhaps you remember
your parents cautioning you to choose your friends wisely. Perhaps you are a
parent who understands this and has given similar advice to your own children.
Even the contemporary business literature recommends that as adults we are aware
of whom we choose to associate. In her book *Executive Presence*, Sylvia Ann
Hewlett (2014) emphasizes how connections are fostered through eye contact,
‘commanding a room’ and ‘right-sizing your reputation’. To deepen gravitas, the
chief component of executive presence, she suggests “living intentionally,
guided by a set of values… surround[ing] yourself with people who are better
than you… [and] empower[ing] others’ presence to build your own” (p. 40-41). Our
interconnectedness and relationships incrementally construct a living, learning,
self-organizing group or organization (Wheatley, p. 226-240). Chapter 6
encourages us to prioritize collaboration, belonging and community. As adult
educators and transformational servant leaders, we should heed this call to
action for the benefit of our learners.

Who we associate with impacts our values and our values have the potential to
impact those with whom we associate. Being reliable, consistently following
through on commitments is a foundational value that impacts and is impacted by
the web of relationships we encounter in our work and life generally. Lytkina
Botelho et al. (2017) did a ten-year study that identified specific attributes
of high-performing CEOs. I would suggest that one of the attributes in
particular can also describe high-performing adult educators and learners, that
is, ‘delivering reliably’ (p. 10): “The ability to reliably produce results was
possibly the most powerful of the four essential CEO behaviors.” (I encourage
you to read the
[article](https://hbr.org/2017/05/what-sets-successful-ceos-apart) to learn more
about the other essential behaviors for CEO success: deciding with speed and
conviction, engaging for impact and adapting proactively.). Consider how your
values are impacted by your associates and how your values impact others.
Wheatley emphasizes the power of this network: “people adopt the mores of a
culture, even those that contradict their personal values. … The culture is in
control, and most people unconsciously adapt” (p. 229). She encourages us to be
conscious in our rebellion and reclaim life-affirming identities by being “fully
engaged, carefully observing what’s going on as we do our work, learning from
experience, applying those learnings, adapting, changing” (p. 231). How might
you foster life-affirming identities in your particular learning environment?

### Activity 8.5: Read and Reflect

Read Chapter 6 (pages 211-243) of Wheatley, M. (2017). *Who Do We Choose to Be:
Facing Reality, Claiming Leadership, Restoring Sanity.* Oakland, CA:
Berrett-Koehler Publishers.

As you read this chapter think about Archbishop Desmond Tutu’s comment “We exist
in a bundle of life. We say, ‘A person is a person through other people.’ It is
not ‘I think therefore I am’ [but rather] I am human because I belong. I
participate, I share” (Wheatley, p. 223).

### Activity 8.6:Blog Assignment

After reading Wheatley chapter 6, prepare the following:

a) Who has influenced you to become the person you are? Who do you depend on as
ground and support for your life?

b) Demonstrate your network of relationships and annotate with the key values or
wisdom you have learned from each person.

c) Because of the influence of these individuals on your values, choose two (not
previously described in your blog) strategies from Brookfield or Silberman and
show how they align with these values.

Create a concept map to show your networks of relationships using free Web 2.0
tools such as bubbl.us or popplet.com, or draw a concept map on paper, take a
picture and upload to your site. Reflect on how this relates to your
teaching/facilitating work.

Unit Summary
------------

In this unit, you have had the opportunity to learn about teaching with depth
and the importance and role of interconnectedness and integrity. So much of the
global culture is superficial. We tweet in 140 characters or less, we get our
news in sound bytes and we have become experts at multi-tasking to the point of
distraction. As adult educators we can and need to go deeper with our learners
by being grounded in who we are and by designing learning that privileges
collaboration, values and systems leading to growth and transformation. When we
are intentional about doing this, we develop our web of interconnectedness and
strengthen our personal and professional integrity. Powerful indeed!

Checking your Learning
----------------------

Use the learning outcomes for this unit as a checklist of understanding before
you move to the next unit. Can you:

-   analyze the effectiveness of training and employee development?

-   explain how to teach and lead for depth using discussion strategies and
    compelling, provocative questions?

-   evaluate adult education methods considering impact on organizational
    culture?

-   articulate your personal web of relationship and impact on values?

References
----------

Brookfield, S. (2016). *The Discussion Book: 50 Great Ways to Get People
Talking*. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hewlett, S. (2014). *Executive Presence*. New York: HarperCollins.

Ibarra, H. (2015). *Act Like a Leader, Think like a Leader*. Boston, MA. Harvard
Business Review Press.

Lytkina Botelho, E. Rosenkoetter Powell, K, Kincaid, S. and Wang D. (May-June
2017). [What Sets Successful CEOs
Apart](https://hbr.org/2017/05/what-sets-successful-ceos-apart). Harvard
Business Review.

Schuyler, K. (2014). *Leading with Spirit, Presence, & Authenticity*. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Wheatley, M. (2017). *Who do we Choose to Be: Facing reality, claiming
leadership, restoring sanity*. Oakland, CA. Berrett-Koehler Publishers Inc.
